What comes to your mind
when you hear the expression “put away”?
You may think of related expressions
such as “cast aside,” “dispose of,”
“discard,” “get rid of.”
What did we have to put away
to become a Christian?
The Bible in the book
of Ephesians 4:22
provides the answer.
That’s Ephesians 4:22:
“You were taught
to put away the old personality
“that conforms
to your former course of conduct
and that is being corrupted
according to its deceptive desires.”
So we had “to put away the old personality.”
But it’s one thing to put it away;
it’s something else to keep it away.
And that’s why
in the very next verse, verse 23,
Paul encourages us to do this:
“And you should continue to be made new
in your dominant mental attitude.”
It’s so important to keep it away,
because the old personality has traits
that can become peace wreckers.
This symposium
will consider five peace wreckers
that we should put away and keep away.
Each talk will include
the following main points:
(1) It will define the peace wrecker,
(2) it will explain how it wrecks peace,
and (3) we will consider how to put it away.
What is the very first one
that we’re going to talk about?
It is inappropriate boasting.
What is inappropriate boasting?
Basically, it’s self-praise,
and the Bible condemns self-praise
Notice Proverbs 27:2:
“Let someone else praise you,
“and not your own mouth;
others, and not your own lips.”
Self-praise is an evidence of pride
that causes one
to elevate himself above others.
Some might develop an unhealthy pride
about their accomplishments,
even in the ministry.
It happened in the first century.
Paul had to write
to the Corinthian congregation
about the dissensions that they were having,
the lack of peace they were experiencing.
Why?
Well, some in the congregation
were “puffed up with pride” about themselves
or other men,
such as Paul, Apollos, Cephas.
They were giving
too much attention to themselves
and to other men.
Well, how could that happen today?
Well, let’s imagine
a group of brothers talking,
and one in the group says,
“With Jehovah’s help
and with diligent prayer and effort,
I finally got a Bible study.”
But right away,
another one in the group proudly declares,
“I have four Bible studies;
two are attending meetings,
and one will soon be baptized.”
Could such a statement be a peace wrecker?
How does inappropriate boasting
wreck peace?
Well, it’s not wrong
to take pleasure in our work
and to thank Jehovah
for the success that we may have.
But inappropriate boasting
about our accomplishments
can stir up competition, envy, and rivalry.
We must remember that self-promotion
does not originate
with our heavenly Father, “the God of peace.”
Where does it originate?
First John 2:16 says:
“The showy display of one’s means of life
“does not originate with the Father,
but originates with the world.”
And would you not agree
that the world is filled with self-praise?
Even on their social media, we see this.
Some of the material
that people post on social media
is designed to make one
appear very important.
And it is a showy display
of their accomplishments,
their material possessions,
or their expensive vacations that they enjoy.
In other words, it’s all about “look at me.”
Well, we want to avoid getting caught up
in the world’s spirit of self-promotion
that wrecks peace.
To illustrate just how devastating
the peace wrecker’s
inappropriate boasting can be,
let’s briefly consider
the Bible character Haman.
He was a proud and haughty man,
and he boasted a lot.
Esther chapter 5 tells us
that he was boasting
with his family and friends
about his wealth, his many sons,
how the king had promoted him
to a high station,
that he was above all the other servants,
and that he’d had a special meal, or banquet,
with the king and queen.
But Haman was hateful and arrogant.
And he was plotting to kill
Jehovah’s faithful servant Mordecai.
But his scheme
and his attitudes were exposed.
And what happened?
The very stake that Haman had built
to hang Mordecai on he was hung on.
And it reminds us
—doesn’t it?—
that at Isaiah 29:20, the Bible says:
“The boaster will come to his finish.”
So because of the devastating effects
that improper boasting
can have on ourselves and others,
we do not even want
to give the impression of boasting.
In the following dramatization,
notice how a sister’s actions
are misunderstood as boasting.
“Put away from yourselves every kind
“of malicious bitterness, anger, wrath,
“screaming, and abusive speech,
as well as everything injurious.”
Did anyone start the day thinking,
‘I believe I’ll show malicious bitterness
to my brother today’?
Of course not!
And yet the potential is there, isn’t it?
But genuine affection fights peace wreckers.
And affection grows when we really know
our brothers and sisters well.
We remember their joys
and pains,
their selfless zeal,
how they came to love Jehovah,
and what they endure.
I’ll get back as soon as I can.
Love you. Bye.
Oh, no!
Haley, love?
So sorry, I’ve got to run.
OK. I’ll ring you about this week.
Thanks. Love you both.
See you!
The afternoon would look better.
Nana!
Hello, Haley, darling.
I’m so, so sorry.
Oh, it’s not too bad.
I’ve got this.
Oh.
How are you though?
Thank you. I’m so sorry.
Oh, poor thing.
Let me clear this up.
Thank you.
Oh, Nana, it’s Sunday today, isn’t it?
This one.
It’s felt like such a long day, hasn’t it?
It has felt like a long day.
Thanks.
Sleep well.
Hello, everyone.
Haley from DeNure Design here,
helping you to be effortlessly elegant.
I want to welcome my new followers
and thank everyone
for subscribing to this channel.
So first up, I’ve got
this gorgeous earring and necklace set.
And as you can see, the first disc I’ve done
is in this warm nude tone,
and that’s great because it goes . . .
Can you believe her?
Haley’s business feed?
But what makes this set is really special.
It’s giving you
that understated elegant look.
If you haven’t done so already,
please hit the subscribe button below.
Because as you know,
when you look this good, you feel great.
Was the sister in this video
boasting inappropriately?
No, she was a humble servant of Jehovah,
kindly and patiently
helping her elderly relative.
But do you recall her business website
and the presentation she made
about her jewelry products?
She said,
“When you look this good,
you feel great.”
Her Christian sister was upset
and took those comments and her actions
to be boastful.
Well, this video reminds us
to think about how our words and our actions
may appear to others.
So now we’re going to get to the question:
How do we put away inappropriate boasting?
A key point that we must always remember
to help us to do just that
is recorded in the book
of 1 Corinthians 4:7,
1 Corinthians 4:7:
“For who makes you different from another?
“Indeed, what do you have
that you did not receive?
“If, in fact, you did receive it,
why do you boast
as though you did not receive it?”
What’s the point of this scripture?
We do not want to boast about ourselves
but give all credit to Jehovah
for the good that we can do.
Now, some people are proud
about their good looks,
their popularity,
their wealth, their position,
their physical strength,
their musical ability.
But remember, King David of ancient Israel
had all of those assets.
But throughout his entire life,
he never became a boastful person.
He remained humble.
Why?
At Psalm 113:5-8,
David gave all credit to Jehovah.
He said that in his case
Jehovah stooped down
and took this “lowly” one
and raised him up
to “sit with nobles.”
And on every occasion that he had,
David would always say, ‘Praise Jehovah,
boast about his holy name.’
Well, we, like David,
should “boast in Jehovah.”
The apostle Paul encouraged us to do that
at 1 Corinthians 1:31:
“The one who boasts,
let him boast in Jehovah.”
What does that mean?
It means that we boast in the privilege
of knowing the true God
and of being able
to be used by him to accomplish his will.
Now, another way
that we can put away improper boasting
is to not talk about ourselves,
but to acknowledge the good
and the fine qualities
that our fellow workers have.
Humble and modest people
don’t brag about what they do,
but they turn their attention
to their fellow workers
and see how Jehovah is using them
and blessing them in his service.
And when we do that,
that creates a very peaceful,
happy environment.
Well, may we continue
to put away and keep away
inappropriate boasting—self-praise.
How?
By giving praise and thanks and honor
to Jehovah for our accomplishments
and by commending our fellow workers
for all the good qualities they have
and for how Jehovah
is using them in his service.
By doing so, we will preserve
our precious possession of peace
with Jehovah and with our brothers.
Brother Seth Hyatt,
a helper to the Service Committee,
will now present
the next talk of this symposium,
“‘Put Away’ Peace Wreckers—Envy.”